#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass book
\begin_preamble
\input $HOME/Documents/textbook/preamble
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\master TeaTimeNumericalAnalysis.lyx
\begin_modules
theorems-ams
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks true
\pdf_pdfborder false
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2cm
\topmargin 2cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter*
Preface
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
About Tea Time Numerical Analysis
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Preface}
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
addcontentsline{toc}{section}{About Tea Time Numerical Analysis}
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
fancyhead[RE]{Preface}
\end_layout

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
fancyhead[LO]{}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Greetings! And thanks for giving 
\shape italic
Tea Time Numerical Analysis
\shape default
 a read.
 This textbook was born of a desire to contribute a viable, completely free,
 introductory Numerical Analysis textbook for instructors and students of
 mathematics.
 When this project began (summer 2012), there were traditionally published
 (very expensive hardcover) textbooks, notably the excellent 
\shape italic
Numerical Analysis
\shape default
 by Burden and Faires, which was in its ninth edition.
 As you might guess by the number of editions, this text is a classic.
 It is one of very few numerical analysis textbooks geared for the mathematician
, not the scientist or engineer.
 In fact, I studied from an early edition in the mid 1990's! Also in the
 summer of 2012 there were a couple of freely available websites, notably
 the popular 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
target "http://nm.mathforcollege.com/"

\end_inset

, complete with video lectures.
 However, no resource I could find included a complete, single-pdf downloadable
 textbook designed for mathematics classes.
 To be just that is the ultimate goal of 
\shape italic
Tea Time Numerical Analysis
\shape default
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The phrase 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tea time
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is meant to do more than give the book a catchy title.
 It is meant to describe the general nature of the discourse within.
 Much of the material will be presented as if it were being told to a student
 during tea time at University, but with the benefit of careful planning.
 There will be no big blue boxes highlighting the main points, no stream
 of examples after a short introduction to a topic, and no theorem-proof
 theorem-proof structure.
 Instead, the necessary terms and definitions and theorems and examples
 will be woven into a more conversational style.
 My hope is that this blend of formal and informal mathematics will be easier
 to digest, and dare I say, students will be more invited to do their reading
 in this format.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Those who enjoy a more typical presentation might still find this textbook
 suits their preference to a large extent.
 There will be a summary of the key concepts at the end of each conversation
 and a number of the exercises will be solved in complete detail in the
 appendix.
 So, one can get a closer-to-typical presentation by scanning for theorems
 in the conversations, reading the key concepts, and then skipping to the
 exercises with solutions.
 I hope most readers won't choose to do so, but it is an option.
 In any case, the exercises with solutions will be critical reading for
 most.
 Learning by example is often the most effective means.
 After reading a section, or at least scanning it, readers are strongly
 encouraged to skip to the statements of the exercises with solutions (marked
 by 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

 
\backslash
hasasolution 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

 
\backslash
haspartwithsolution
\end_layout

\end_inset

), contemplate their solutions, solve them if they can, and then turn to
 the back of the book for full disclosure.
 The hope is that, with their placement in the appendix, readers will be
 more apt to consider solving the exercises on their own before looking
 at the solutions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The topical coverage in 
\shape italic
Tea Time Numerical Analysis
\shape default
 is fairly typical.
 The book starts with an introductory chapter, followed by root finding
 methods, interpolation (part 1), numerical calculus, and interpolation
 (part 2).
 This covers what, at SCSU, constitutes a first semester course in numerical
 analysis.
 Future efforts will add chapters on linear algebra and differential equations,
 making it a full year course.
 As this book is intended for use as a free download or an inexpensive print-on-
demand volume, no effort has been made to keep the page count low or to
 spare copious diagrams and colors.
 In fact, I have taken the inexpensive mode of delivery as liberty to do
 quite the opposite.
 I have added many passages and diagrams that are not strictly necessary
 for the study of numerical analysis, but are at least peripherally related,
 and may be of interest to some readers.
 Most of these passages will be presented as digressions, so they will be
 easy to identify.
 For example, Taylor's Theorem plays such a central role in the subject
 that not only its statement is presented.
 Its proof and a bit of history are added as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

crumpets
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Of course they can be skipped, but are included to provide a more complete
 understanding of this fundamental theorem of numerical analysis.
 For another example, as a fan of dynamical systems, I found it impossible
 to refrain from including a section on visualizing Newton's Method.
 The powerful and beautiful pictures of Newton's Method as a dynamical system
 should be eyebrow-raising and question-provoking even if only tangentially
 important.
 There are, of course, other examples of somewhat less critical content,
 but each is there to enhance the reader's understanding or appreciation
 of the subject, even if the material is not strictly necessary for an introduct
ory study of numerical analysis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Along the way, implementation of the numerical methods in the form of computer
 code will also be discussed.
 While one could simply ignore the programming sections and exercises and
 still get something out of this text, it is my firm belief that full appreciati
on for the content can not be achieved without getting ones hands 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dirty
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 by doing some programming.
 It would be nice if readers have had at least some minimal exposure to
 programming whether it be Java, or C, web programming, or just about anything
 else.
 But I have made every effort to give enough detail so that even those who
 have never written even a one-line program will be able to participate
 in this part of the study.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In keeping with the desire to produce a completely free learning experience,
 GNU Octave was chosen as the programming language for this book.
 GNU Octave (Octave for short) is offered freely to anyone and everyone!
 It is free to download and use.
 Its source code is free to download and study.
 And anyone is welcome to modify or add to the code if so inclined.
 As an added bonus, users of the much better-known MATLAB will not be burdened
 by learning a new language.
 Octave is a MATLAB clone.
 By design, nearly any program written in MATLAB will run in Octave without
 modification.
 So, if you have access to MATLAB and would prefer to use it, you may do
 so without worry.
 I have made considerable effort to ensure that every line of Octave in
 this book will run verbatim under MATLAB.
 Even with this earnest effort, though, it is possible that some of the
 code will not run under MATLAB.
 It has only been tested in Octave! If you find any code that does not run
 in MATLAB, please let me know.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I hope you enjoy your reading of 
\shape italic
Tea Time Numerical Analysis
\shape default
.
 It was my pleasure to write it.
 Feedback is always welcome.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset VSpace bigskip
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset space \hfill{}
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset space \hfill{}
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="2" columns="1">
<features tabularvalignment="middle">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" width="0">
<row>
<cell alignment="left" valignment="top" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Leon Q.
 Brin
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell alignment="left" valignment="top" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Plain Layout
brinl1@southernct.edu
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset

 
\begin_inset space \hfill{}
\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
How to Get GNU Octave
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
addcontentsline{toc}{section}{How to Get Octave}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Octave is developed by the GNU Project for the GNU operating system, which
 is most often paired with a Linux kernel.
 At its core, Octave is therefore GNU/Linux software.
 It runs natively on GNU/Linux machines.
 It must be ported (converted somehow) to run on other operating systems
 like Windows or OS X.
 Ports (converted programs) do exist for these operating systems, but are
 significantly more complicated to install than native Windows or native
 OS X programs.
 Nonetheless, the advantage to this approach is the end result which looks
 and runs very much like a native application, desktop shortcut/alias and
 all.
 The disadvantage is the somewhat lengthy installation procedure with parts
 that sometimes don't work together as expected, resulting in a failed installat
ion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Windows and Mac users may also install hardware virtualizing software.
 Such software is freely available as native Windows and native OS X software.
 Then a complete GNU/Linux operating system can be installed inside the
 virtualizer as a so-called virtual machine.
 Octave can be installed in the virtual machine as a native program.
 With some configuring, the virtual machine can be made to look and feel
 almost like other Windows or OS X apps.
 The advantage to this approach is that installation is relatively straightforwa
rd.
 The disadvantage is that it requires a lot of computing resources.
 People with an old (slow) machine or a machine with little RAM (memory)
 will likely be disappointed in performance.
 Octave will be even slower than other programs if it runs at all.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
GNU/Linux can also be installed 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

side-by-side
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 with Windows or OS X, creating a dual-boot machine.
 The advantage to this approach is it relieves all of the issues of the
 other two methods.
 Octave is installed as a native application and all computer resources
 are dedicated to GNU/Linux so Octave will run as quickly as possible on
 your machine.
 The primary disadvantage to this approach is that you will have to decide
 whether to run your usual (Windows or OS X) operating system or GNU/Linux
 every time the computer starts.
 You will not be able to switch between Octave and the apps you are used
 to running.
 For example, switching from iTunes to Octave, or from Word to Octave and
 back, is not possible.
 You get one or the other.
 A secondary disadvantage is the need to repartition the computer's hard
 drive (or the need to add an additional hard drive to the machine), making
 the installation process potentially devastating to the machine.
 A complete backup of your machine is required to maintain safety.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All that may not mean much to you.
 To see how it translates into advice and step-by-step instructions on installin
g GNU Octave, see this textbook's companion website,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\align center
\begin_inset Flex URL
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

http://lqbrin.github.io/tea-time-numerical/more.html
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
How to Get the Code
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
addcontentsline{toc}{section}{How to Get the Code}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All the code appearing in the textbook can be downloaded from this textbook's
 companion website,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\align center
\begin_inset Flex URL
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

http://lqbrin.github.io/tea-time-numerical/ancillaries.html
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\noindent
The code printed within and accompanying Tea Time Numerical Analysis electronica
lly is distributed under the GNU Public License (GPL).
 Details are available at the website.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Acknowledgments
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Acknowledgments}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I gratefully acknowledge the generous support I received during the writing
 of this textbook, from the patience my immediate family, Amy, Cecelia,
 and Victorija exercised while I was absorbed by my laptop's screen to the
 willingness of my Spring 2013 Seminar class, Elizabeth Field, Rachael Ivison,
 Amanda Reyher, and Steven Warner to read and criticize an early version
 of the first chapter.
 In between, the Woodbridge Public Library staff, especially Pamela Wilonski,
 helped provide a peaceful and inspirational environment for writing the
 bulk of the text.
 Many thanks to Dick Pelosi and Terri Bennett for their reviews, with an
 extra dose of thanks to Dick for the many kind words and encouragements
 throughout the endeavor.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
